Options
=======

Birth Options
=============

These options can only be set during character creation. As such, they are not 
displayed on the normal 'options' screen.

maximise_mode
Maximise mode determines how your racial and class bonuses to abilities are 
used. If maximise_mode is switched on, then racial and class bonuses are 
included in ability score calculations. This results in slightly lower ability 
scores during character generation, but results in higher potential ability 
scores during gameplay.

preserve_mode
Preserve mode determines how artefacts are handled if they are not seen. Since 
there can be only one copy of any artefact in play, the program remembers when 
one has been generated (either during dungeon creation or because a creature has 
dropped it). This way, one will not be generated twice. If preserve_mode is 
switched on, then leaving a level without finding an artefact will reset its 
value - allowing it to be found later. If preserve_mode is switched off, an 
artefact that is not found will be gone forever.

use_autoroller
When rolling your ability scores, switching use_autoroller on will make the 
program ask you for acceptable minima for your abilities and repeatedly roll 
sets of abilities until it arrives at an acceptable set. When use_autoroller is 
switched off, only a single set of ability scores is rolled.

spend_points
When spend_points is switched on, ability scores are not rolled (this overrides 
the setting in 'use_autoroller'). Instead, you are given a number of points with 
which to buy your ability scores.

ironman_shop
When this option is switched on, all shops are permanently locked (except the 
library). This makes the game much harder and more challenging for experienced 
players.

User Interface Options
======================

rogue_like_commands
When this option is switched on, the keys used for the various Hellband commands 
are changed to match those used by the historical game 'Rogue'.

quick_messages
When this option is switched on, any keypress will be acceptable to go past the 
'-more-' prompt after a message. When it is switched off, you must press the 
'Esc' key to get past the '-more-' prompt.

other_query_flag
When this option is switched on, attempting to use various commands that handle 
items will be confirmed, with a reminder of which item you are about to use. 
When it is switched off, selecting an item to use will use the item immediately 
without confirmation.

always_repeat
When this option is switched on, certain commands (tunnel, open, disarm, etc.) 
will repeat themselves up to 99 times or until you are disturbed or those 
commands are successful, whichever come first.

depth_in_feet
When this option is switched on, the depth indicator in the bottom right hand 
corner of the screen will indicate a depth in feet (with each level being 50' 
lower than the previous). If it is switched off, then the depth indicator will 
indicate the number of the level.

show_choices
When this option is switched on, choices of item (from inventory/equipment) or 
choices of spell will be shown in sub-windows. When this option is switched off, 
such choices will not, and must be manually asked for in the main window.

show_details
When this option is switched on, a physical description of each monster will be 
included along with its statistics when it is recalled. When this option is 
switched off, only the statistics will be displayed.

ring_bell
When this option is switched on, a default 'beep' will be played when an invalid 
key is pressed.

use_colour
When this option is switched on, text will be displayed in colour. When it is 
switched off, all text will be in white-on-black.

player_symbols
When this option is switched on, the symbol or graphic used to indicate the 
player will vary, depending on the race and class of the player. When this 
option is switched off, a single generic symbol or graphic will be used.

hilite_player
When this option is switched on, a yellow box will surround the player graphic 
or symbol to help locate it on the screen. When the option is switched off, no 
box will be displayed.

confirm_stairs
When this option is switched on, you will be asked to confirm when you attempt 
to leave a level by the stairs. When it is switched off, you will leave the 
level immediately when you press the key to do so.

centre_view
When this option is switched on, the main map will scroll one character at a 
time to keep the player in the middle of the screen. When it is switched off, 
the map will scroll in large jumps when the player approaches the screen edge.

Disturbance Options
===================

find_ignore_stairs
When this option is switched on, the player will ignore stairs whilst running 
and continue to run past them. When it is switched off, the player will stop 
running when encountering stairs.

find_ignore_doors
When this option is switched on, the player will ignore open or broken doors 
whilst running and continue to run past them. When it is switched off, the 
player will stop running when encountering open or broken doors.

find_cut
When this option is switched on, the player will 'cut' corners whilst running. 
When the option is switched off, the player will run into the corner, making 
sure it is explored.

disturb_move
When this option is switched on, the player is disturbed from running or resting 
when any visible (even through ESP) hostile monster moves. When it is switched 
off, the player will ignore any monster.

disturb_panel
When this option is switched on, the player will stop running when the map jumps 
to a new panel. When it is switched off, the player will continue to run into 
the new panel. If 'centre_view' is switched on, then this option will have no 
effect - since the map will not jump between panels.

disturb_state
When this option is switched on, the player is disturbed from resting by poison, 
stuinning or bleeding. When this option is switched off, the player can rest 
with one of the above conditions - even if it means bleeding to death while 
resting.

disturb_minor
When this option is switched on, the player is distracted from resting by their 
torch fading, hearing a door open or working out how good an item is after 
carrying it around for a while. When it is switched off, none of these minor 
changes will disturb the player.

disturb_other
When this option is switched on, you will be disturbed each time an uncursed 
teleportation device wants to activate and asked whether you wish to teleport or 
not. When it is not switched on, uncursed teleportation devices will not be able 
to teleport you.

alert_hitpoints
When this option is switched on, you will be reminded when you are running out 
of hit points. Exactly how many hit points are considered 'running out' is 
determined by the value of the 'Hitpoint Warning' option. When this option is 
switched off, you will not be reminded when you are running out of hit points.

alert_failure
This option is not currently used. Setting or resetting it will have no effect.

disturb_allies
When this option is switched on and the 'disturb_move' option is also switched 
on, movement of friendly monsters will disturb you as well as movement of 
hostile monsters. When it is switched off, only hostile monsters will disturb 
you. When 'disturb_move' is switched off, this option has no effect.

Creature Options
================

use_old_target
When this option is switched on, all ranged attacks that require targeting (for 
example most spells) will automatically be fired at the most recently selected 
target if it is still visible. When it is switched off, you will be asked for a 
target each time you use a ranged attack.

flow_by_sound
When this option is switched on, monsters will attempt to move to your current 
location to attack you even if they can not see you. When it is switched off, 
they will not use this behaviour

flow_by_smell
When this option is switched on, monsters will attempt to move to your recent 
locations (or your current location if you have not recently moved). When it is 
switched off, they will not use this behaviour.

smart_learn
When this option is switched on, monsters will notice if you resist an attack 
that they have and are unlikely to use that same attack on you again. When it is 
switched off, they will not use this behaviour.

smart_cheat
When this option is switched on, monsters will 'cheat' and never bother using 
ineffectual attacks on you - even if there is no way for them to know that the 
attack would be ineffectual. When it is switched off, they will not use this 
behaviour.

stupid_monsters
When this option is switched on, monsters will behave much less intelligently 
and be consequently easier to trick and/or kill. When it is switched off, only 
certain monsters will behave in such a stupid manner.

monsters_carry
When this option is switched on, monsters will pick up objects from the floor, 
and carry them around until killed. When it is switched off, monsters will 
ignore items on the floor.

Object Options
==============

carry_query_flag
When this option is switched on, you will be asked to confirm each time you are 
about to pick up an item. When it is switched off, commands that pick up items 
will proceed without confirmation.

always_pickup
When this option is switched on, you will automatically attempt to pick up items 
when you step into their square. When it is switched off, you will not try to 
pick up items in your square unless you use the 'g' command.

stack_force_notes
When this option is switched on, items will be stacked together even if one of 
them has been inscribed with some kind of note. When it is switched off, items 
will not stack if one of them has an inscribed note. In either case, if two 
items have both been inscribed with different notes then they will not stack 
together.

stack_force_costs
When this option is switched on, items marked with different price discounts 
will stack together. When it is switched off, items with different price 
discounts will not stack together.

show_labels
When this option is switched on, slots in your equipment list will be shown with 
labels indicating which part of the body represent. When it is switched off, 
slots in your equipment list are shown in a simple list.

show_weights
When this option is switched on, items in your equipment and inventory lists are 
shown with their weight. When it is switched off, the weights are not shown.

stack_allow_items
When this option is switched on, weapons and armour are allowed to stack. When 
it is switched off, only miscellaneous items are allowed to stack.

stack_allow_wands
When this option is switched on, wands with the same number of charges are 
allowed to stack. When it is switched off, only miscellaneous items are allowed 
to stack.

equippy_chars
When this option is switched on, a line of characters or graphics are displayed 
above your ability scores on the main display. These graphics represent the 
equipment that you are wielding. When this option is switched off, these 
graphics do not appear.

plain_descriptions
When this option is switched on, the 'flavours' of items (e.g. potions) are not 
displayed if the items have been identified. When it is switched off, the 
flavours are always displayed.

auto_destroy
When this option is switched on, items that are considered worthless will be 
destroyed rather than picked up. Similarly, worthless items will be destroyed 
without confirmation when you use the 'k' command. When it is switched off, you 
will be asked for confirmation when you deliberately attempt to destroy a 
worthless item, and you will pick them up rather than destroy them when they are 
on the floor.

confirm_wear
When this option is switched on, you will be asked to confirm if you attempt to 
wear an item that you know is cursed. When it is switched off, you will be 
allowed to wear known cursed items without confirmation.

unify_commands
When this option is switched on, the commands to use objects (read, quaff, zap, 
etc.) can be used interchangeably - allowing you to use a single 'u' command to 
use any item. When it is switched off, different types of object have different 
methods of activation.

testing_stack
When this option is switched on, multiple items can exist in the same floor 
square. When it is switched off, each floor square can only contain one item.

Performance Options
===================

Note: These options are designed to optimise performance on very old and slow 
computers. There should be no reason to change the default settings on any of 
these options on any computer less than a couple of years old.

view_reduce_lite
When this option is switched on, your light radius will be reduced to a single 
square whilst running. When it is switched off, your light radius will remain 
normal whilst running. 

view_reduce_view
When this option is switched on, the distance that you can see will be reduced 
whilst running. When it is switched off, the distance that you can see will 
remain normal whilst running.

avoid_abort
When this option is switched on, you can not abort running by pressing a key. 
When it is switched off, you can abort running by pressing a key.

avoid_other
When this option is switched on, monsters that normally 'shimmer' or change 
appearance will not do so. When it is switched off, monsters will shimmer 
normally. Note that this option has no effect if graphics are being used.

flush_failure
When this option is switched on, failing in an attempt to do something (for 
example picking a lock) will cancel all further key presses until you have been 
notified of your failure. When it is switched off, queued keypresses will still 
take effect after a failure.

flush_disturb
When this option is switched on, being disturbed will cancel all further key 
presses until you have been notified of the disturbance. When it is switched 
off, queued keypresses will still take effect after a disturbance.

flush_command
This option is not used. Changing it will have no effect.

fresh_before
When this option is switched on, the screen is refreshed before each command is 
processed. When it is switched off, the screen is not refreshed at this time.

fresh_after
When this option is switched on, the screen is refreshed after each command is 
processed. When it is switched off, the screen is not refreshed at this time.

fresh_message
When this option is switched on, the screen is refreshed after each message is 
printed. When it is switched off, the screen is not refreshed at this time.

compress_savefile
When this option is switched on, only the most recent messages are saved to the 
save file. When it is switched off, all messages in the message list are saved.

view_yellow_lite
When this option is switched on, the area lit by your torch is displayed in a 
special way so that your light radius can be seen. When it is switched off, the 
area lit by your torch is not displayed.

view_bright_lite
When this option is switched on, the area in your line of sight (regardless of 
whether it is light or dark) is displayed in a special way so that your line of 
sight can be seen. When is it switched off, your line of sight is not displayed.

view_granite_lite
When this option is switched on, walls lit by your torch are displayed in a 
special way so that your light radius can be seen. When it is switched off, only 
floors in your light radius are displayed. When 'view_yellow_lite' is switched 
off, this option has no effect.

view_special_lite
When this option is switched on, areas are displayed according to the above 
three options. When it is switched off, no special lighting effects are used 
overriding the above three options.

rand_unbiased
When this option is switched on, random numbers generated by the system are 
stripped of any bias that might occur. When it is switched off, the random 
number generation system is quicker but less random.

no_centre_run
When this option is switched on, the 'centre_view' option is suppressed whilst 
you are running. When it is switched off, the view continues to be centred 
during running. When 'centre_view' is switched off, this option has no effect.

Miscellaneous Options
=====================

small_levels
When this option is switched on, some levels are generated smaller than normal. 
When it is switched off, all levels are generated at full size.

empty_levels
When this option is switched on, some levels are generated as large empty 
caverns rather than as mazes of corridors. When it is switched off, all levels 
use corridors.

auto_haggle
When this option is switched on, items are bought in stores for a fixed price. 
When it is switched off, you must haggle for items but you can get them cheaper.

auto_scum
When this option is switched on, the computer will restart the generation of a 
dungeon level if the level is considered too boring. This results in a more 
exciting (but more dangerous) game. When it is switched off, levels are used 
regardless of how boring they are.

expand_look
When this option is switched on, it is possible to target monsters and items 
that you do not have a direct line of sight to. When it is switched off, only 
monsters in your line of sight can be targeted.

expand_list
When this option is switched on, you can cycle between available targets when 
using target selection. When it is switched off, you cannot do this.

view_perma_grids
When this option is switched on, objects that have been seen in permanently lit 
squares are still displayed even when you can no longer see the grid. When it is 
switched off, objects disappear from the screen when you can no longer see them.

view_torch_grids
When this option is switched on, objects that have been seen in temporarily lit 
squares are still displayed even when you can no longer see the grid. When it is 
switched off, objects disappear from the screen when you can no longer see them.

dungeon_align
When this option is switched on, rooms within the dungeon will align themselves 
to the 'panel boundaries' that are used for scrolling when 'centre_view' is 
switched off. When it is switched off, rooms might not be aligned with the panel 
boundaries, and may look strange.

dungeon_stair
When this option is switched on, level generation always ensures that there is 
at least one 'up' staircase and one 'down' staircase reachable from your start 
location without having to tunnel. When it is switched off, this is not 
guaranteed.

dungeon_small
When this option is switched on, all dungeon levels will be small, regardless of 
the setting of the 'small_levels' option. When it is switched off, small levels 
may sometimes occur, depending on the setting of the 'small_levels' option, but 
most will be full size.

easy_open
When this option is switched on, if you use the open or close commands and there 
is only one adjacent thing that can be opened or closed then the computer will 
not bother asking you to select a direction. When this option is switched off, 
you will always be asked for a direction when using those commands.
	
easy_disarm
When this option is switched on, attempting to walk over a known trap will cause 
you to stop and try to disarm it instead. When it is switched off, you will 
simply walk over the trap, setting it off.

skip_corruptions
When this option is switched on, the character display will skip the corruption 
list. When it is switched off, the list will be shown.

multi_stair
When this option is switched on, stairs will be anywhere from one to six levels 
long. When it is switched off, stairs will always be only a single level long.


Base Delay Factor
=================

The delay factor is used as a delay between frames when Hellband is animating a 
missile, spell or breath weapon.


HitPoint Warning
================

This setting determines how many hit points are considered 'low', for purposes 
of the 'alert_hitpoints' option.

Autosave Options
================

These setting determine when Hellband will automatically update your save file. 
The auto-updating of the save file has no effect on game play, but can prevent 
hours worth of play being lost if your computer crashes.

Window Flags
============

These settings determine what is displayed in the various sub-windows that 
Hellband can use. By default, no sub-windows are displayed, but you can switch 
them on from the 'Window' menu on the Hellband main window.

There are seven extra windows, three of which are named. These windows are all 
identical in function.
