Magic Basics
============

Magic is found throughout Hellband - from the creatures you fight to the items 
you use.

Magic within items is in varied forms, but magic used by characters is a lot 
more structured.

Characters of certain classes can learn magic. This can be of one of three 
types: Divine magic, Arcane magic and Mindcrafting.

Common Features
===============

All three types of magic use 'mana' (sometimes called 'spell points') to power 
their effects. Characters gain spell points based on one of their ability scores 
and based upon their level. When a spell is cast, some of these points are 
spent.

It is theoretically possible to still cast a spell without having enough power 
points to do so. This is rather dangerous, however, since the caster can damage 
their health or leave themselves vulnerable to attacks when doing so.

Spell points recover with time. If you have run out, then resting is the best 
course of action.

Arcane Magic
============

Arcane spell users learn their spells through study at the Library. They need a 
book to learn the spell from, and they must carry this book to use as a 
reference when they wish to use the spell.

Arcane spell users can choose which spell they will study.

Arcane magic relies on the aura of the caster being relatively free. As such, it 
is easily disrupted if the caster is wearing too much armour. Wearing heavy 
armour reduces the amount of spell points that a caster has available. Gloves, 
in particular, hamper them.

Divine Magic
============

Divine spell users are granted spells by their patron. They must still use a 
book of prayers as a reference when casting spells. Divine spell users need to 
study their prayer books in the Library in order to gain the insights needed to 
understand the new spells that their patrons give them.

Divine spell users are given spells at the whim of their patron, and do not 
choose which spells they are given.

Divine spell users are not hampered by armour.

Mindcrafting
============

Mindcrafting users do not need to learn their powers. They automatically gain 
them as they get more experienced. They have many fewer powers than other spell 
users have spells, but those powers tend to be more flexible in their usage.

Mindcrafters are not hampered by armour, except for helmets.

Elements
========

All matter is composed of elements, and magic can split those elements apart. In 
their pure form (such as in magical attacks), elemental forces can be very 
dangerous and have a variety of effects. Below is a list of the various types of 
damaging attack, and what possible extra effects they may have.

*Acid*
As well as simply damaging you, acid can damage your armour. Acid can 
occasionally damage your charisma.

*Chaos*
The energies of chaos can confuse you, corrupt you, damage your inventory or 
drain your life force. They are unpredictable and may do none, some or all of 
the above.

*Cold*
Cold damage can damage items in your inventory, and occasionally damage your 
strength.

*Confusion*
Confusion attacks can leave you stunned or confused.

*Dark*
Dark attacks can blind you, but will heal you if you are in wraithform.

*Disenchantment*
Disenchantment attacks can drain the magic from your armour and weapon.

*Electricity*
As well as simply damaging you, electricity damage can destroy some items in 
your inventory (for example potions) and occasionally damage your dexterity.

*Fire*
As well as simply damaging you, fire can destroy various items in your inventory 
(for example scrolls). Fire can occasionally damage your strength.

*Force*
Direct telekinetic force can stun you.

*Gravity*
Gravity can teleport you, slow you or stun you.

*Hell Fire*
The polar opposite to holy fire, hell fire damages you less if you have an 
affinity with the Death realm, and more if you have an affinity with the Life 
realm.

*Holy Fire*
A spiritual flame, rather than a physical one - holy fire damages you less if 
you have an affinity with the Life realm, and more if you have an affinity with 
the Death realm.

*Ice*
Ice can cut you and stun you.

*Inertia*
The forces of inertia can slow you down.

*Light*
Light attacks can blind you, and dispel wraithform.

*Nether*
Nether is the force of unlife. As such, it drains your life force from you.

*Nexus*
Nexus, the element of locality, can teleport you around and warp your body.

*Plasma*
This hot liquid fire can penetrate even the toughest fire resistance.

*Poison*
Poison continues to damage you over a period of time, or until magically cured. 
It can also occasionally damage your constitution.

*Hellslime*
Hellslime is the substance that hell is made from. In its raw state, it acts 
like a combination of poison and acid, as well as possibly corrupting you.

*Shards*
These sharp pieces of metal and rock can damage your inventory, and are 
extremely likely to make you bleed.

*Sound*
Sound can stun you as well as damaging you normally.

*Time*
Time is a particularly nasty attack which can either revert you to a younger age 
or age you.

*Water*
Water damage can stun and confuse you, as well as damaging items in your 
inventory.

Realms
======

*Chaos*
The chaos realm is the most destructive realm. It concentrates on damaging 
spells. It is a very good choice for anyone who wants to be able to damage their 
foes directly, but is somewhat lacking in non-combat spells.

*Corporeal*
The corporeal realm contains spells that exclusively effect the caster's body, 
although some spells also indirectly effect other creatures or objects. The 
corporeal realm is particularly good at sensing spells.

*Death*
The death realm has a combination of life-draining spells, curses and undead 
summoning. Like chaos, it is a very offensive realm.

*Folk*
The folk realm is the least specialised of all the realms. Folk magic is capable 
of doing any effect that is possible in other realms - but usually less 
effectively than the specialist realms.

*Life*
The life realm is devoted to healing and buffing, with some offensive capability 
against undead and demons. It is the most defensive of the realms.

*Nature*
Nature has a large number of summoning spells and miscellaneous spells.

*Planar*
Planar magic contains spells of summoning and movement.

*Sorcery*
The sorcery realm contains spells dealing with raw magic itself, for example 
spells dealing with magical items. It is the premier source of miscellaneous 
non-combat spells.
